===== PAGE 1 =====
  
1 
 
420104 Assessment 3: AI Roadmap 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Graduate Certificate in Artificial Intelligence Management 
 
===== PAGE 2 =====
  
2 
 
1 Introduction 
The modernization of power grids has brought a wealth of data and a host of challenges surrounding 
everything from data management to the increased need to improve customer experience. While the 
power industry has been one of the slower adopters of AI, compared to sectors like technology and 
automotive, players from across the value chain have rushed to adopt AI in recent years.  
 
Figure 1 Source GlobalData Patent Database 
Wind power generators just like other power companies are increasingly reliant on vast amounts of data 
to generate, transmit, and supply energy. Smarter grids provide more data, through devices such as 
smart meters for players throughout the value chain to use. Internet of Things (IoT) technology creates a 
wealth of data for generation companies to use.  But ensuring that all data are of sufficient type and 
quality is a challenge but none the less can provide meaningful insights. 
These insights can help manage critical infrastructure of a wind farm by improving efficiencies particularly 
in areas such as asset management. (Asset management is an organisation’s coordinated activities to 
realise the full value of assets in delivering service delivery objectives. It is carried out over the whole 
asset lifecycle.) 
2 The company 
At the time of commencement of operations in April 2017, the  Anemoi1 wind farm was the third largest in 
Australia (by generation output).  The Anemoi Wind Farm uses 75 GE turbines with a tip height of 135m 
and a rotor diameter of 103m. Comprising 52km of internal roads and 21.5km of transmission lines, the 
farm generates enough electricity to power around 120,000 homes.  
 
1 The company name has been changed for commercial in confidence reasons. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
  
3 
 
3 Description of use case for AI 
3.1 What challenges are to be addressed? 
Wind power must still compete with conventional generation sources on a cost basis.  Even though the 
cost of wind power has decreased dramatically in the past several decades, wind projects must be able to 
compete economically with the lowest-cost source of electricity. 
 
To drive costs down and maintain wind farm performance, the company needs to focus on operational 
and maintenance (O&M) costs, which are set to increase as wind assets age. Achieving maximum yield 
at minimum risk and cost across the wind farm’s full operational life is a major asset management 
challenge. 
 
3.2 What features of AI is being proposed? 
Data from a variety of sensors can be used to inform an unsupervised machine learning model. Variables 
included generator speed, power output, temperature, oil level, vibrations, and shaft gap measurements. 
The prediction of failures is a particular strength of unsupervised machine learning models. The model 
adapts to the particular asset, and little historical failure data is required. 
 
The need to monitor the performance of generators can be achieved by comparing it to an ideal “digital  
twin”. This comparison allows for identification of performance deviations due to component failure or 
stresses on the turbine blades for example. Production data can be utilised from the wind farm and can 
then be compared to its performance to an ideal representation of the plant. The digital twin will utilise a 
linear regression model, employing component and generator performance data. 
4 Justification and alignment with business strategy  
A rigorous asset management process is a key enabler for the secure and affordable infrastructure of the 
wind farm. The predictability of cost and reliability is an underpinning factor of the company’s business 
strategy .  O&M is critical to 
1. System reliability and capability 
2. Managing aging infrastructure and 
3. Grid hardening 
4.1 Why is the proposed project the best use of company resources? 
The typical cost of an average size commercial wind turbine is $US 1.3 million per megawatt (MW) of 
electricity producing capacity.  As the company’s wind turbines have a capacity of 5 MW the cost 
associated with a catastrophic failure event is in the order of $US 6.5 million. 
 
Ai can be used to detect and manage changes in the generators to allow for the prediction of failure 
events in the turbine and provide additional insights to the engineering team to improve maintenance. 
This will drive down O&M costs and extend the life of the turbine, allowing each turbine to keep producing 
electricity for longer without being replaced. 
 
4.2 How will this contribute to strengthening the company’s competitive 
positioning? 
Reducing the cost of electricity production, and hence ultimately the price of electricity to the consumer, is 
a key competitive advantage.  With each turbine having an expected life of 20 to 25 years, operational 
expenditure (opex) becomes a critical factor in determining the cost of electricity production and what the 
consumer pays for that electricity.  
 
The only way to lower the price of electricity is by lowering production costs. Reducing the opex of the 
wind farm will allow the company to remain competitive with conventional power and solar power 
generators. 
===== PAGE 4 =====
  
4 
 
5 Reflection on impact 
5.1 Limitations and challenges  
From a performance perspective, data bias, audit and ongoing verification of algorithms are issues that AI 
systems must consider when developing algorithms. Machine learning is ultra-sensitive to poor data, with 
the adage “garbage in, garbage out” holding true here.  
It is critical that data is taken and made machine readable, so that it is quality in, quality out. For trusted 
AI, frequent verification of data is a necessity to ensure algorithms remain valid over time and that as the 
machines learn they do not deviate from the original algorithms. 
The AI may have some limitations in areas that don’t have the historical data available to find the 
intelligence, because it has never occurred or existed before. These challenges can be overcome by 
using different and more selective data sources, as well as different Ai approaches. 
A different approach could include evolutionary machine learning and AI based on a form of genetic 
algorithms. This would enable high-value complex dynamic systems (e.g., turbines and generators) to 
have digital twins evolved from available sensor data with an efficiency and level of detail that is difficult to 
achieve using neural networks. 
5.2 Socio-cultural and ethical impacts 
As with all new technology, AI is likely to face initial mistrust from members of the company workforce. 
Robust education and change programs will be needed to convince team members to trust the 
technology. 
A requirement of developing a wind farm is establishing a community and neighborhood benefits scheme. 
Australia’s Clean Energy Council (CEC) defines community benefit sharing as “sharing the rewards of 
renewable energy development with local communities”.  
As the benefits of the wind farm pass to the community the question arises is to what extent should the 
company inform the community of applying AI to the asset management of the power plant.  If the AI 
increases the profitability of the company, then the community has an interest in how much is invested in 
the AI and the potential benefits of that investment.  
6 Expected benefits and ways to measure success 
6.1 What benefits and advantages can be expected from successful 
implementation? 
The key benefits and value for the company are: 
• Successfully identifying turbine failure events in advance, saving potentially millions of dollars 
over the life of the plant by avoiding unplanned outages 
• Allowing the company to possess a deeper understanding of asset performance and identify 
incipient failure modes, allowing for swift remediation 
• Driving costs down and maintaining wind farm performance 
• Uninterrupted operation and improved productivity of the wind turbines 
• The development of a thorough and sophisticated asset management strategy that fully embrace 
the later stages of a wind farm’s life  
• Continued upskilling and development of both company staff and the broader program/industry 
through specialist training 
===== PAGE 5 =====
  
5 
 
6.2 Metrics and KPIs to measure ongoing success 
The following measures for the AI implementation and evaluation are: 
• Data: Measures for the quality and lineage of the data or the provenance of the data.  
• Security: Data feeds around the security of the models and their usage. Allowing for an 
understanding of tampering or improper usage of the AI environments. 
• Cost/Value: The cost of data and the value created by the data and the algorithm. 
• Bias: The measurement bias by monitoring direct or derived data continuously. 
• Accountability: Establishment who is responsible for the systems use and the decisions made. 
• Audit: Continuous collection of data, that in aggregate to form the basis for audit trails and review of 
the system periodically.  
• Time: These measures should be reviewed monthly in initial stages of the AI deployment and 
quarterly after 12 months of deployment. 
===== PAGE 6 =====
  
6 
 
7 Project plan 
7.1 Work packages, milestones, deliverables & stakeholders 
 
 
